# Studying Recombination

In this project, I study the implementation of recombination, calculating important quantities such as the optical depth and visibility functions. These functions are critical since they enter the photon equations. Moreover, the visibility function is sharply peaked around recombination, and thus requires increased time resolution close to its peak. The visibility function enters the calculation of the Sachs-Wolfe effect, the most prominent CMB feature. The optical depth enters the calculation of the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect, describing the photon energy gain/loss as it travels through the gravitational potentials generated by larga-scale structure. The Doppler term involves the visibility and its derivative, and therefore are also peaked during recombination.

The visibility function is defined as

$$
    g(a) = \kappa'e^{-\kappa},
$$

where
$$
    \kappa(\tau_1, \tau_2) = \int_{\tau_1}^{\tau_2}an_e\sigma_Td\tau,
$$
$\kappa' = an_e\sigma_T$, $n_e$ is the number density of free electrons, $a$ is the scale factor, $\tau$ is the conformal time, and $\sigma_T$ is the Thomson scattering cross-section.

In order to find $n_e$, we need to calculate recombination. The simplest result comes from the Saha equation. Let $x_e = n_e/n_H$, where $n_H$ is the number density of hydrogen atoms. The Saha equation assumes thermal equilibrium and states that

$$
    \frac{1 - x_e}{x_e^2} = \frac{2\zeta(3)}{\pi^2}\left(\frac{2\pi k_BT}{m_e}\right)^{3/2}e^{B_H/T},
$$
where $\zeta(3)$ is Apery's constant, $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant, $m_e$ is the electron rest mass, $B_H$ is the neutral Hydrogen binding energy, and $T$ is the current temperature of thermal equilibrium.

The Saha equation breaks down after recombination, as the formation of hydrogen atoms becomes less efficient and thermal equilibrium is destablished. The Saha equation predicts that the free electron number density decays exponentially after recombination, when in fact, freeze-out occurs and the free electron fraction becomes a constant.

From the electron fraction $x_e$, we calculate the free electron number density as

$$
    n_e = x_en_H = x_e(1 - Y_\mathrm{He})n_b = x_e(1 - Y_\mathrm{He})\eta n_\gamma,
$$
where $Y_\mathrm{He}$ is the Helium fraction and $\eta$ is the baryon-to-photon ratio. $n_\gamma$ can be calculated as

$$
    n_\gamma = \frac{2\zeta(3)}{\pi^2 \hbar^3 c^3}(k_BT)^3.
$$

## References
- "The Cosmic Microwave Background", by Ruth Durrer
- "A Line of Sight Approach to Cosmic Microwave Background Anisotropies", by U. Seljak and M. Zaldarriaga